chore: Guidelines for developing Keptn APIs (#8476)
keptn/keptn: docs/developer/api_guidelines.md

> # Introduction

Author: @thisthat gh does this automagically ;) 
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/72415058/180151940-d0bc5cfc-c527-4b1d-a3ff-e18091868270.png)

> # Introduction

Reviewer: 😮 I always forgot about this feature

> # Introduction

Author: yep it's easy to oversee it in the gh ui thb :P

This document serves as a guideline for adding endpoints to the Keptn API,
and should help to provide a consistent user experience across all of our APIs.

# API Grouping
We define three different *types* of APIs:

* `public` - customer facing public API exposed by the API gateway
* `internal` - internally APIs used by internal services never exposed by the API gateway
* `operations` - internal API providing non-functional features like statistics, debug and testing never exposed by the API gateway

## Public APIs
Public APIs are always provided by the API gateway and mapped to the K8s Service as follows:

API Gateway: `http://cluster.keptn.sh/api/<component>/<version>/<api resources>`

K8S Service: `<component>/public/<version>/<api resources>`

## Internal APIs
Internal APIs are not exposed by the API gateway are accessed by other services in Keptn like follows:

K8S Service:  `<component>/internal/<version>/<api resources>`

## Operations APIs
Operations APIs are not exposed by the API gateway and **should** cover non-functional features
like statistics, debug or testing APIs etc...

K8S Service: `<component>/operations/<version>/<api resources>` 

---

# Authentication

> Each request **must** have a *Authorization* header containing a base64 encoded bearer string:

Author: @thisthat Good point: Reading more about how GH is doing it. How about introducing an identifiable prefix like described [here](https://github.blog/2021-04-05-behind-githubs-new-authentication-token-formats/) as well?

> Each request **must** have a *Authorization* header containing a base64 encoded bearer string:

Reviewer: Very nice idea 👍

> Each request **must** have a *Authorization* header containing a base64 encoded bearer string:

Author: However, I think the API guidelines are not the right place to talk about how our tokens are computed and formatted, so I just did the change from Bearer to token key as you've proposed.

## Example

```
GET /controlplane/v1/sequences
Authorization: Bearer dGhlc2VjcmV0dG9rZW5mb3JrZXB0bmFwaQ==
```

Internal communication does not require a token.

---

# Custom Methods

Sometimes, functionality cannot be expressed using the default methods on classical REST resources.
For this use cases *custom methods* **should** be used:

```
https://domain/api/<component>/<version>/<api resources>:<custom-method>
```

- Custom methods **should** use the `HTTP POST` method.
- The URL **must** end with a verb separated with a colon.

## Example
```
POST cluster.keptn.sh/api/controlplane/v1/sequences/94dbe764-e186-48bf-b90d-a53b21fca847:pause
POST cluster.keptn.sh/api/tokens/v1/token:rotate
```

 ---

> # Filtering

Reviewer: I think this can be its own document since it is self contained

> API endpoints supporting result filtering **must** accept the filter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
API endpoints supporting result filtering **must** accept a filter
```

as a query parameter named *filter* containing a *filter expression*:

In general each field **should** be filter-able. Exceptions **must** be documented.

> *Filter expressions* follow the following form: `<fieldname> operator <value>`

Reviewer: I can only filter by a single value. Is this intended? 
Or are filter expressions a serialized array (as of [OpenAPI 3.0](https://swagger.io/docs/specification/serialization/))? If so, will they be considered as `&&` or `||`?

Author: Actually, a filter expression is a set of these expressions above combined with boolean operators. I need to describe this better.
However, I begin having the feeling that introducing these kind of filtering is a bit of overkill and actually not needed for the APIs of Keptn. Maybe we are fine with the already existing approach of just using regular query parameter that require a perfect match to the field we want to filter on (basically as we have it right now). Advanced filtering using a dedicated "filter" query parameter with a special simple query language like this could still be considered in the future...
what dou you say?

 @thisthat @bacherfl

## Filters

### Filter based on numbers

**Operators:**

```
= != < <= > >=
```

**Format**:

```
int - decimal and hexadecimal (leading 0x)`
float - scientific notation (optional exponent e or E) 
```

**Example:**

```
failedAttempt >= 3
average >= 1.0E2
responseTimeSec > 0.23
```

> ## Filter based on strings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Filter based on strings
```

**Operators:**

```
= != contains, starts-with, ends-with
```

**Format**:

```
strings wrapped in single quotes
special characters escaped with \
```

**Example:**

```
projectName = 'myproject'
```

> ## Filter based on booleans

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Filter based on booleans
```

**Operators:**

```
= !=
```

**Format**:

```
true false
```

**Example:**

```
`active != true`
```

> ## Filter based on Date / Time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Filter based on Date / Time
```

**Operators:**

```
= != < <= > >=
```

**Format**:

```
ISO 8601 string
```

**Example:**

```
lastModified >= '2020-01-01T01:00:00Z
```

---
# JSON Format

> 

Reviewer: Maybe add a sentence about Accept and Content-Type headers that MUST be `application/json`

Payload sent to and returned by API endpoints **should** be represented as JSON objects.  
The structure of these objects **should** be documented in the swagger API docs.
When accepting JSON payload from a client, the API endpoint **should** validate if the payload adheres to the documented structure, and shall return an error
if it does not.
However, if a client sends an object with an unknown property, the API endpoint **should** just ignore it, and proceed with the execution of the request.

Groups of properties that are mutually exclusive from each other **should** be stored in nested objects, instead of having all properties in a flat JSON object.

*Example:*

*NOT OK*:
```json
{
  "name": "my-credential-config",
  "remoteURL": "my-url:8080", 
  "httpsToken": "some-value",
  "httpsUser": "my-user",
  "sshKey": "another-value",
  "sshKeyPassword": "something"
}
```

*OK:*
```json
{
  "name": "my-credential-config",
  "remoteURL": "my-url:8080", 
  "https": {
    "token": "some-value",
    "user": "my-user"
  },
  "ssh": {
    "key": "another-value",
    "keyPassword": "something"
  }
}
```
---
# Asynchronous Operations

> For requests that trigger a long running/asynchronous operation, the API endpoint **should** respond with a `202 -Accepted` HTTP response code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For requests that trigger a long running/asynchronous operation, the API endpoint **should** respond with a `202 - Accepted` HTTP response code.
```

The returned payload **should** include an identifier for the job triggered by the request. This identifier should enable clients to track the current state of the
job, or to perform other operations on it (e.g. cancelling, pausing). It **should** be suffixed with `ID`

*Example:*

```
POST /projects/19340-29304:migrate

Status: 202 - Accepted

Body:

{

>   "jobId": "123-456-789"

Reviewer: By the sentence above the example, I would expect the name to be `jobID`

}
```

After accepting and starting/queueing a long running operation, the server **may** provide the current state of the operation via a `GET` endpoint. Example:

```
GET /projects/123-456-789:migrate?job-id=123-456-789

200 OK
{
  "status": {...}
}
```
---
# Naming Conventions

## Component Names

> Service names **should** be concise and as simple as possible. They **should** be written in *kebap-case*. Also, since the name of a service will also be used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Service names **should** be concise and as simple as possible. They **should** be written in *kebab-case*. Also, since the name of a service will also be used
```

for the internal domain name in K8s, they **should** adhere to the DNS label standard defined in [RFC 1035](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3339), which means that service names **should**:

- Contain at most 63 characters
- Contain only lowercase alphanumeric characters or '-'
- Start with an alphabetic character
- End with an alphanumeric character

## Path Names

> Paths to an API for a specific type of resource **should** contain the resource type (in singular). E.g.:

Reviewer: IMHO
```suggestion
Paths to an API for a specific type of resource **MUST** contain the resource type (in singular). E.g.:
```

`v1/project`, and NOT `v1/projects`

## Query parameters

> Query parameters **should** be in *kebap-case* and **should** not contain any upper case letters. For time based properties, please also refer to the [time formats](time_formats.md) section.

Reviewer: the file doesn't exist

## Field names

Field names **should** be in camel case and start with a lower case character. Further, field names **should** only contain alphanumeric characters.
Property names of JSON payloads sent to and from the API **should** always be well defined, and arbitrary property names (e.g. keys in a map) are not allowed.
If a map should be represented, the corresponding property **should** rather be an array containing objects with properties for the key and value, respectively
Examples:

*NOT OK:*

```json
{
  "receivedEvents": {

>     "my-arbitrary-event-type": 4,

Reviewer: this is not in camel case. Do we want to allow it?

Author: I'd say we should leave this as a SHOULD.

    "my-other-event-type": 2
  }
}
```

*OK:*

```json
{
  "receivedEvents": [
    {
      "key": "my-arbitrary-event-type",
      "value": 4
    },
    {
      "key": "my-other-event-type",
      "value": 2
    }
  ]
}
```
---
# Pagination

> As soon as a *listable collection* is provided via the API, it **should**

Reviewer: IMHO
```suggestion
As soon as a *listable collection* is provided via the API, it **MUST**
```

support pagination.

The endpoint

> * **must** provide a query parameter called `page-key` that points to the next page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **must** provide a query parameter called `page-key` that points to the page to fetch.
```

  If the parameter is missing, the first page **must** be returned

> * **must** provide a query parameter called `page-size` that sets the

Reviewer: I would also add that the endpoint must document what is the max page size it supports

| Standard Method | HTTP Method                |
|-----------------|----------------------------|
| list            | GET <resource collection>  |
| get             | GET <resource>             |
| create          | POST <resource collection> |
| full update     | PUT <resource>             |
| partial update  | PATCH <resource>           |
| delete          | DELETE <resource>          |

## list
Used to search for resources and get back a collection
* **must** map to HTTP GET method
* **must not** use a request body
* **must** return a response body that contains a list of resources that **may** be empty
* **may** take additional HTTP query parameters

## get
Used for accessing a single resource
* **must** map to HTTP GET method
* **must not** use a request body
* **must** return a response body that contains the resource if successful
* **may** take additional HTTP query parameters

## create
Used to create a new resource
* **must** map to HTTP POST method
* **may** accept a resource id to choose for the caller. If the resource id already exists, the method **must** fail
* **may** contain the fields necessary to construct the resource as request body

> * **must** return HTTP 201 - Created on success

Reviewer: I would escape to facilitate reading
```suggestion
* **must** return `HTTP 201 - Created` on success
```

* **should** return the resource id in the *Location* header as a relative URL
* **should** return a response body that contains the created resource

## full update
Used to do an update on a resource
* **must** map to HTTP PUT method
* **may** be used to create a new resource
* **must** contain all fields of the resource

> * **must** return HTTP 201 - Created if it was used for creating of a new resource

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **must** return `HTTP 201 - Created` if it was used for creating a new resource
```

* **should** return the resource id in the *Location* header as a relative URL if it was used for creating of a new resource
* **should** return a response body that contains the resource if it was used for creating of a new resource

> * **must** return an empty response body a HTTP 204 -No content if it was used for updating an existing resource

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **must** return an empty response body and `HTTP 204 - No content` if it was used for updating an existing resource
```

## partial update
Used do a partial update on a resource
* **must** map to HTTP PATCH method
* **must** contain updated fields in JSON Merge Patch format (https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7396) in the request body
* **must** not be used to create a new resource

> * **must** return HTTP 204 -No Content on success

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **must** return `HTTP 204 - No Content` on success
```

* **must** return an empty response body

## delete
Used to remove a resource
* **must** map to HTTP DELETE method
* **may** be applicable to a single resource or a collection of resources. A filter criteria **must** be provided as query parameters to delete a collection of resources.
* **must** not use a request body
* **must** not use a response body
* **must** return HTTP 204 - No Content on success
* **must** return HTTP 202 - Accepted on async. deletion request

---
# Time Values Conventions

## Time Formats

> Time values **should** be represented as UTC times and **must** be encoded according to the [RFC 3339](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3339) standard.

Reviewer: Prev you used the ISO format 🤔 I would stick to one

> This standard accepts multiple variations of time formats, however to avoid confustion all time values in our APIs **should** be stored and represented using the following format:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This standard accepts multiple variations of time formats, however, to avoid confusion all time values in the APIs **MUST** be stored and represented using the following format:
```

- `2022-06-29T08:56:38.547Z`

When ingesting time values, i.e. by accepting them as request parameters, APIs **should** be able to handle multiple variations of the RFC3339 standard. Examples:

- `1985-04-12T23:20:50.52Z`
- `1996-12-19T16:39:57-08:00`
- `1990-12-31T23:59:60Z`
- `1990-12-31T15:59:60-08:00`
- `1937-01-01T12:00:27.87+00:20`
- `2022-06-28T13:43:14.71657055Z`

## Time Value Property Naming

All properties referring to a time value **must** end with the suffix `Time`, e.g. `modifyTime`, `triggerTime` etc. This suffix shall be used consistently across all APIs, meaning that
we **should** not have properties like `creationTimestamp`, `modifiedAt` etc.
For time frames, the property names `startTime` and `endTime` **should** be consistently used - other variations like `fromTime` or `toTime` **should** therefore NOT be used. 

> 

Reviewer: I would use a MUST and MUST NOT, respectively

---
# Versioning

Each service has its own individual API version, i.e., there is no shared version for all services within Keptn. The versioning scheme **must** follow
the semantic versioning conventions by maintaining a `major`, `minor` and `patch` version (`<major>.<minor>.<patch>`).

These versions **must** be incremented according to the following rules:

## Major Version Updates

> The major version is increased whenever there is a breaking change, such as a modified structure of a request model, or changed HTTP status codes.

Reviewer: How to handle the following case? 
I perform a `GET /project/nonexisting-project` and I get a 500. Since the project does not exist, the expected HTTP return code should be 404. Proposing the bugfix should we bump the version or not? In case, which part of the version should be bumped?

## Minor Version Updates
The minor version is increased when a new, but backwards compatible feature is introduced.

## Patch Version Updates

> The patch version is increased for changes that do not change the functionality of the API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The patch version is increased for changes that do not change the functionality of the API.
```
